<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
    <head>
        <title>Methodology</title>
        <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="TheData.css" />
    </head>
    <body>
        <ul class="navigation">
            <li><a href="index.xhtml">Home</a></li>
            <li><a href="MeettheSingers.xhtml">Meet the Singers</a></li>
            <li><a href="Methodology.xhtml">Our Methodology</a></li>
            <li><a href="song-markup.xhtml">Explore the Songs</a></li>
            <li><a href="TheData.xhtml">Our Findings</a></li>
        </ul>
        <p>Our project was inspired by Dr. Angela Davis’ Blues Legacies and Black Feminism. In the
            book, Davis transcribes the lyrics of songs by salient blues artists to craft a
            dimension of American history that celebrates and uplifts the narratives of Black women.
            One of the main themes of Davis’ book is the idea of consciousness raising and how music
            can act as a catalyst not only for social change, but also for community building.
            Rainey and Smith sang about love in all forms—salacious, unrequited, abusive—giving
            weight to the frustrations of women that were not present in popular music and
            transforming them into a shared experience. Davis believed these blues songs contributed
            to an “alternative consciousness” of women, which encouraged intimacy and sexual
            expression. The next question was—how are we going to reflect this in our code? We
            decided on three primary XML elements—”description,” “action” and “cause,” to illustrate
            the interpersonal experiences of the songs’ women subjects. We also had secondary XML
            elements— “mental health,” “relationship” and “money,” to outline potential effects on
            their daily lives. Each group member selected five songs to markup and we modified the
            schema after a preliminary examination of the songs and their themes. After the markup,
            we peer reviewed each others’ songs to make sure we were all using the XML elements the
            same way. Our corpus is a little unconventional—we found the songs ourselves. This meant
            we had a lot of freedom but it was also a little more challenging. We weren’t using
            songs from just one album, or chapters from a book. Given our research question, we
            thought it made more sense to include the songs of multiple jazz and blues singers. We
            ultimately chose songs based on their popularity at the time and if they were in the
            public domain. Our corpus is also unique because a lot of these songs have barely been
            preserved throughout history. Many do not have any sheet music or lyrics published on
            the internet—meaning we created XML by listening to them. You may see the word
            “indecipherable,” while reading through the songs—because the recordings are so old,
            sometimes the singer’s voice would be muffled and we were unable to make out the words.
        </p>
    </body>
</html>
