<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <title>Explore the Songs</title>
      <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="ExploretheSongs.css"/>
   </head>
   <body>
      <ul class="navigation">
         <li><a href="index.xhtml">Home</a></li>
         <li><a href="MeettheSingers.xhtml">Meet the Singers</a></li>
         <li><a href="Methodology.xhtml">Our Methodology</a></li>
         <li><a href="song-markup.xhtml">Explore the Songs</a></li>
         <li><a href="TheData.xhtml">Our Findings</a></li>
      </ul>
      <h2>Table of Contents</h2>
      <ul>
         <li><a href="#Nobody-Knows">Nobody Knows when You're Down and Out</a>, Bessie Smith</li>
         <li><a href="#Aggravatin-Papa">Aggravatin Papa</a>, Bessie Smith</li>
         <li><a href="#Crazy-Blues">Crazy Blues</a>, Mamie Smith</li>
         <li><a href="#Bo-WeavilBlues">Bo-Weavil Blues</a>, Ma Rainey</li>
         <li><a href="#Down-Hearted">Down Hearted Blues</a>, Bessie Smith</li>
         <li><a href="#Golfing-Papa">Golfing Papa</a>, Mamie Smith</li>
         <li><a href="#Dont-Care">Don't Care Blues</a>, Mamie Smith</li>
         <li><a href="#Lonesome-Mama">Lonesome Mama Blues</a>, Mamie Smith</li>
         <li><a href="#Right-Here">It's Right Here For You</a>, Mamie Smith</li>
         <li><a href="#St.Louis">The Saint Louis Blues</a>, Bessie Smith</li>
         <li><a href="#Stack">Stack O' Lee Blues</a>, Ma Rainey</li>
         <li><a href="#HomelessBlues">Homeless Blues</a>, Bessie Smith</li>
         <li><a href="#Last-Minute">Last Minute Blues</a>, Ma Rainey</li>
         <li><a href="#Slave">Slave to the Blues</a>, Ma Rainey</li>
         <li><a href="#Bad-Luck">Bad Luck Blues</a>, Ma Rainey</li>
      </ul>
      <div class="legend">
         <h3>Legend</h3>
         <ul>
            <li><span style="color:blue;">Action</span></li>
            <li><span style="color:green;">Description</span></li>
            <li><span style="color:red;">Cause</span></li>
            <li><span style="color:orange;">Mental-Health</span></li>
            <li><span style="color:purple;">Relationship</span></li>
            <li><span style="color:brown;">Money</span></li>
            <li>*Refer to this legend to further understand what the colors represent and what we looked at when answering our research question.</li>
         </ul>
      </div>
      <section id="Nobody-Knows">
         <h2>Nobody Knows when You're Down and Out</h2>
         <h2>Bessie Smith</h2>
         <p>
            <span style="color: brown;">Once I lived a life of a millionaire
               Spendin' my money, I didn't care
               I carried my friends out for a good time
               Buy bootleg liquor, champagne, and wine</span>
            </p>
         <p>
            <span style="color: brown;">When I begin to fall so low</span>
            I didn't have a friend and no place to go
            But if I ever get my hands on a dollar again
            I'm gonna hold on to it 'til them eagles grin
            </p>
         <p>
            Nobody knows you
            When you down and out
            <span style="color: brown;">In my pocket not one penny</span>
            And my friends, I haven't any
            </p>
         <p>
            But if I ever get on my feet again
            And I'll meet my long-lost friend
            It's mighty strange without a doubt
            Nobody knows you when you down and out
            I mean, when you down and out
            </p>
         <p>
            Mmm
            When you down and out
            <span style="color: brown;">Mmm, not one penny</span>
            And my friends, I haven't any
            </p>
         <p>
            Mmm, and I fell so low
            <span style="color: purple;">Nobody wants me 'round their door
               Mmm, without a doubt
               No man can use you when you down and out</span>
            I mean when you down and out
            </p>
      </section>
         <section id="Aggravatin-Papa">
         <h2>Aggravatin Papa</h2>
         <h2>Bessie Smith</h2>
         <p>
            <span style="color: green;">I know a triflin' man
               They call him Triflin' Sam</span>
            He lives in Birmingham
            Way down in Alabam'
            </p>
         <p>
            Now the other night
            <span style="color: blue;">He had a fight
               With a gal named Mandy Brymm</span>
            She plainly stated she was aggravated
            <span style="color: blue;">And she shouted out to him</span>
            </p>
         <p>
            Aggravatin' papa, don't you try to two-time me
            I said, don't two-time me
            Aggravatin' papa, treat me kind or let me be
            I mean, just let me be
            </p>
         <p>
            <span style="color: blue;">Listen while I get you told</span>
            <span style="color: green;">Stop messin' round, sweet jellyroll</span>
            If you stay out with a high-brown baby
            <span style="color: blue;">I'll smack you down, and I don't mean maybe</span>
            </p>
         <p>
            Aggravatin' papa, I'll do anything you say
            Anything you say
            But when you go struttin', do your strut around my way
            So papa, just treat me pretty, be nice and kind
            <span style="color: purple;">The way you treated me will make me lose my mind</span>
            Aggravatin' papa, don't you try to two-time me
            </p>
         <p>
            Just treat me pretty, be nice and sweet
            I got a darn forty-four that don't repeat
            Aggravatin' papa, don't you try to two-time me
            </p>
      </section>
      <section id="Crazy-Blues">
         <h2>Crazy Blues</h2>
         <h2> Mamie Smith </h2>
         <p>
            <span style="color: orange;">I can't sleep at night
               I can't eat a bite</span>
            <span style="color: red;">'Cause the man I love 
               He don't treat me right</span>
            </p>
         <p>
            <span style="color: purple;">He makes me feel so blue</span> 
            I don't know what to do 
            <span style="color: blue;"> Sometime I sit and sigh 
               And then begin to cry </span>
            <span style="color: red;">'Cause my best friend said his last goodbye</span>
            </p>
         <p>
            There's a change in the ocean
            Change in the deep blue sea, my baby 
            I'll tell you folks, there ain't no change in me 
            <span style="color: red;">My love for that man will always be</span>
            </p>
         <p>
            Now <span style="color: blue;">I can read his letters</span>
            I sure can't read his mind
            I thought he's lovin' me
            <span style="color: red;">He's leavin' all the time
               Now I see my poor love was blind</span>
            </p>
         <p>
            <span style="color: orange;">Now I got the crazy blues</span>
            <span style="color: red;">Since my baby went away
               I ain't got no time to lose</span>
            I must find him today
            </p>
         <p>
            Now the doctor's gonna do all that he can
            But what you're gonna need is an undertaker man <span style="color: orange;">
               I ain't had nothin' but bad news
               Now I got the crazy blues</span>
            </p>
      </section>
         <section id="Bo-WeavilBlues">
         <h2>Bo-Weavil Blues</h2>
         <h2>Ma Rainey</h2>
         <p>
            Hey, bo-weavil, don't sing the blues no more 
            Hey, hey, bo-weavil, don't sing the blues no more 
            Bo-weavil's here, bo-weavil's everywhere you go</p>
         <p>
            <span style="color: green;">I'm a lone bo-weavil</span>, been out a great long time 
            <span style="color: green;">I'm a lone bo-weavil</span>, been out a great long time 
            <span style="color: blue;">I'm gonna sing these blues to ease the bo-weavil's lonesome mind</span></p>
         <p>
            I don't want no man to put no sugar in my tea 
            I don't want no man to put no sugar in my tea 
            <span style="color: green;">Some of them so evil</span>, I'm 'fraid they might poison me</p>
         <p>
            <span style="color: blue;">I went downtown and bought me a hat 
               I brought it back home, I laid it on the shelf </span>
            Looked at my bed, <span style="color: orange;">I'm gettin' tired of sleeping by myself</span></p>
      </section>
      <section id="Down-Hearted">
         <h2>Down Hearted Blues</h2>
         <h2>Bessie Smith</h2>
         <p>
            <span style="color: red;">Gee, but it's hard to love someone when that someone don't love you!</span>
            <span style="color: orange;">I'm so disgusted, heart-broken, too; I've got those down-hearted blues;</span>
            <span style="color: purple;">Once I was crazy 'bout a man; he mistreated me all the time</span>
            The next man I get has got to promise me to be mine, all mine!
            </p>
         <p>
            Trouble, trouble, I've had it all my days
            Trouble, trouble, I've had it all my days;
            <span style="color: orange;">It seems like trouble going to follow me to my grave</span>
            </p>
         <p>
            I ain't never loved but three men in my life;
            I ain't never loved but three men in my life:
            My father, my brother, the man that wrecked my life
            </p>
         <p>
            It may be a week, it may be a month or two
            It may be a week, it may be a month or two
            <span style="color: blue;">But the day you quit me, honey, it's comin' home to you</span>
            </p>
         <p>
            I got the world in a jug, the stopper's in my hand
            I got the world in a jug, the stopper's in my hand
            <span style="color: blue;">I'm gonna hold it until you meet some of my demands</span>
            </p>
      </section>
         <section id="Golfing-Papa">
         <h2> Golfing Papa </h2>
         <h2> Mamie Smith </h2>
         <p>
            Golfing Dan was a golfing man
            He'd golf from morn till night.
            He had a mama,<span style="color: green;">a loving mama.</span>
            <span style="color: purple;">He didn't treat her right.</span>
            He'd come home, all tired out,<span style="color: blue;">
               And right to bed he'd go.</span>
            <span style="color: orange;">His mama soon got tired of this,</span>
            <span style="color: blue;">And these words she whispered low.</span>
            </p>
         <p>
            <span style="color: purple;"> She says, golfing papa you're way over par.
               You'll have to stop puttin on the green.</span> 
            <span style="color: red;">You've had your way on the fairway.</span>
            You know just what I mean.
            </p>
         <p>
            Now, your stance is perfect,
            Your aim is true.
            But papa when you drive,<span style="color: red;">
               You fail to follow through.</span>
            </p>
         <p> 
            <span style="color: purple;"> She says, golfing papa you're way over par.
               You'll have to stop puttin on the green.</span>
            Use your niblick, you'll have to stop puttin on the green. 
            </p>
         <p> 
            Now what you need is a golfin coach,<span style="color: green;">
               You're alright on your drive</span>
            <span style="color: green;">But bad on your approach.</span> 
            <span style="color: green;">What you want, your mama has got</span>
            But son you'd better practice your explosion shot.
            </p>
         <p> 
            Now listen papa you must learn your stuff 
            Cause when you drive you slice, and go right in the rough.
            <span style="color: purple;">From paying green fees you've got me broke,
               Your shaft is bent and now you've lost your master stroke.</span>
            </p>
         <p> 
            So pack your golf bags you've had your fun
            <span style="color: blue;">I found</span><span style="color: green;">another man who made a hole in one.</span>
            </p>
         <p> 
            <span style="color: purple;"> She says, golfing papa you're way over par.
               You'll have to stop puttin on the green.</span>
            Turn in your scorecard, you'll have to stop puttin on the green 
            </p>
      </section>
      <section id="Dont-Care">
         <h2> Don't Care Blues </h2>
         <h2> Mamie Smith </h2>
         <p>
            <span style="color: orange;">I haven't eat for a week, I even walk in my sleep.</span>
            Bugs buzz around me, fleas always creep. 
            Every night and day<span style="color: blue;">I hang my head and weep.
               Yes, and weep.</span> 
            I love my baby, I want him for myself. <span style="color: purple;">
               If he don't be mine, he won't have nobody else.</span>
            <span style="color: red;">He has left me,</span> I do the best I can.<span style="color: green;">
               I'm a do-right kid,</span><span style="color: blue;">get a friend and replace that man.</span>
            </p>
         <p>
            <span style="color: orange;">Now I got the don't care blues, can't be satisfied. 
               Every night and day I hang my head and cry.</span>
            <span style="color: blue;">I go to the grocery store to buy a rockin' chair.</span> 
            Blues overtakes me gonna rock away my cares. <span style="color: red;">
               Now my love has been refused.</span> Now I got the don't care blues.
            </p>
         <p>
            <span style="color: orange;">I woke up this mornin' with the blues around my head.</span>
            <span style="color: red;"> My baby left me, it nearly killed me dead.</span> 
            <span style="color: red;">He went away, and never had a word to say.</span>
            <span style="color: orange;">Now I'm worried, and lonesome deep down in my heart.</span>
            <span style="color: purple;">Because I know the best of friends must part.</span>
            <span style="color: blue;">He went away,</span> it nearly breaks my heart.
            </p>
         <p>
            <span style="color: orange;">Now I got the don't care blues, can't be satisfied.
               Every night and day I hang my head and cry.</span> 
            I don't wanna (indecipherable).
            The brown I had (indecipherable) not for me. 
            <span style="color: red;">Now my love has been refused.</span>
            Now I got the don't care blues
            </p>
      </section>
         <section id="Lonesome-Mama">
         <h2>Lonesome Mama Blues</h2>
         <h2>Mamie Smith</h2>
         <p>
            You hear the whistle blow 
            I want you all to know
            <span style="color: red;">That train is taking my sweet manaway
               From me today</span>
            </p>
         <p>
            Don't know the reason why 
            <span style="color: orange;">I must sigh and cry
               But somethin' 'bout him makes me feel this way</span>
            That's why I say...
            </p>
         <p>
            <span style="color: orange;">I've got those lonesome mama blues </span>
            <span style="color: red;">Since my love has been refused 
               My poor heart's grievin'</span>
            <span style="color: red;">Because he's leavin' me </span>
            But wait and see
            Some day he'll come back again
            On that very same old train
            I know he'll never find <span style="color: green;">
               Another gal so good and kind</span>
            </p>
         <p>
            <span style="color: blue;">Every night upon my knees
               I pray the Lord above</span>
            "Hear my plea
            <span style="color: red;">Send back to me The only man I love!"</span>
            </p>
         <p>
            <span style="color: red;">Lord, my prayer, now don't refuse
               His sweet love don't let me lose!"</span>
            <span style="color: orange;">I'm just a lonesome mama 
               Singin' lonesome mama blues</span>
            </p>
      </section>
      <section id="Right-Here">
         <h2> It's Right Here For You</h2>
         <h2> Mamie Smith </h2>
         <p>
            I heard Jim Jackson say to Mandy Green 
            <span style="color: green;">You've been the cruelest gal I ever seen</span>
            <span style="color: blue;">You made me walk you 'round the park last night
               Then wouldn't kiss me,do you think that's right?</span>
            Just then Miss Mandy turned around to him
            She said: Now listen here Jim
            </p>
         <p>
            <span style="color: green;">It's right here for ya,if you don't get it, it ain't no fault of mine
               It's up to him to get it, you will agree
               I've got a lovin' disposition
               So dear, I'm in the same position
               Cause it's right here for you
               If you don't get it, it ain't no fault of mine
               Sweet Lawd, babe Taint no fault of mine</span>
            </p>
         <p>
            When they got married and they settled down <span style="color: purple;">
               He'd stay out late at night to roam around
               She soon got tired of that,like women do</span>
            Made up her mind that she would stop it too
            <span style="color: blue;">One night she waited with a great big club
               When he came in, she said Bub</span>
            </p>
         <p>
            <span style="color: green;">It's right here for ya,if you don't get it, it ain't no fault of mine
               It's up to him to get it, you will agree
               I've got a lovin' disposition
               So dear, I'm in the same position
               Cause it's right here for you
               If you don't get it, it ain't no fault of mine
               Sweet Lawd, babe Taint no fault of mine</span>
            </p>
      </section>
         <section id="St.Louis">
         <h2>The St. Louis Blues</h2>
         <h2>Bessie Smith</h2>
         <p>
            I hate to see the evening' sun go down 
            I hate to see the evening'sun go down 
            <span style="color: orange;">It makes me think I'm on my last go 'round</span> 
            </p>
         <p>
            <span style="color: orange;">Feeling' tomorrow like I feel today 
               Feeling' tomorrow like I feel today</span>
            <span style="color: blue;">'ll pack my grip and make my getaway</span></p>
         <p>
            Saint Louis woman with her diamond rings 
            <span style="color: green;">Pulls that man around by her apron strings</span> 
            <span style="color: red;">Wasn't for powder and the store-bought hair
               The man I love wouldn't go nowhere, nowhere</span></p>
         <p>
            I got them Saint Louis Blues; just as blue as I can be 
            <span style="color: red;">He's got a heart like a rock cast in the sea</span>
            Or else he wouldn't have gone so far from me
            </p>
      </section>
      <section id="Stack">
         <h2>Stack O'Lee Blues</h2>
         <h2>Ma Rainey</h2>
         <p>
            Stack O' Lee was <span style="color: green;">a bad man</span> 
            Everybody knows 
            And when they see Stack O' Lee comin'
            They'd give him the road 
            <span style="color: purple;">He was my man 
               But he done me wrong</span>
            </p>
         <p>
            Stack O' Lee, Stack O' Lee <span style="color: green;">
               Was short-tempered and bad</span>
            <span style="color: red;">He'd take everything his women would bring
               And everything they had</span>
            <span style="color: purple;">He was my man
               But he done me wrong</span>
            </p>
         <p>
            <span style="color: blue;">Stack O' Lee's on the warpath</span>
            And you'd better run <span style="color: green;">
               'Cause Stack O' Lee is a bad man</span>
            <span style="color: blue;">And he'll kill you</span> just for fun
            He was my man
            <span style="color: red;">But he done you wrong</span>
            </p>
         <p>
            Stack O' Lee's in jail now 
            <span style="color: blue;">With his face turned to the wall</span>
            <span style="color: red;">Pretty women and old corn whiskey 
               Was the cause of it all</span>
            He was my man 
            <span style="color: red;">But he done you wrong</span>
            </p>
         <p>
            <span style="color: brown;">A hundred-dollar coffin 
               And a eighty-dollar hat</span>
            <span style="color: blue;">Carriеd him to the cemetery</span> 
            But it did not bring him back 
            <span style="color: purple;">He was my man 
               But he done me wrong</span>
            </p>
      </section>
      <section id="HomelessBlues">
         <h2>Homeless Blues</h2>
         <h2>Bessie Smith</h2>
         <p>
            <span style="color: red;">Mississippi River, what a fix you left me in, 
               Old Mississippi River, what a fix you left me in, 
               Mudholes of water clear up to my chin.</span>
            </p>
         <p>
            <span style="color: brown;">House without a steeple didn't even have a door,
               House without a steeple didn't even have a door, 
               Plain old two room shanty but it was my home sweet home.</span>
            </p>
         <p>
            Ma and pa got drownded, Mississippi you the blame, 
            My ma and pa got drownded, Mississippi you the blame,
            Mississippi River, I can't stand to hear your name.
            </p>
         <p>
            <span style="color: orange;">Homeless, yes, I'm homeless, might as well be dead,
               Oh you know I'm homeless, homeless, might as well be dead,</span> 
            Hungry and disgusted, no place to lay my head.
            </p>
         <p>
            <span style="color: green;">Wish I was an eagle, but I'm a plain old black crow, 
               Wish I was an eagle, but I'm a plain old black crow,</span>
            <span style="color: blue;">I'm gonna flap my wings and leave here, and never come back no more.</span>
            </p>
      </section>
         <section id="Last-Minute">
         <h2>Last Minute Blues</h2>
         <h2>Ma Rainey</h2>
         <p>
            Minutes seem like hours, hours seem like days 
            Minutes seem like hours, hours seem like days 
            <span style="color: blue;">It seem like my daddy won't stop his evil ways</span></p>
         <p>
            <span style="color: orange;">Seem like every minute's going to be my last</span> 
            <span style="color: orange;">Seem like every minute's going to be my last</span> 
            <span style="color: blue;">If I can't tell my future I won't tell my past</span></p>
         <p>
            The brook runs into the river, river runs into the sea 
            The brook run into the river, river run into the sea 
            If I don't run into my daddy, somebody'll have to bury me</p>
         <p>
            If anybody asks you who wrote this lonesome song 
            If anybody asks you who wrote this lonesome song 
            Tell 'em you don't know the writer, but Ma Rainey put it on</p>
      </section>
         <section id="Slave">
         <h2>Slave to the Blues</h2>
         <h2>Ma Rainey</h2>
         <p>
            Ain't robbed no train, ain't done no hangin' crime
            Ain't robbed no train, ain't done no hangin' crime
            <span style="color: red;">Just been a slave to the blues, grievin' 'bout that man of mine</span>
            </p>
         <p>
            Blues, please tell me, do I have to die a slave?
            Blues, please tell me, do I have to die a slave?
            <span style="color: blue;">Do you hear me pleadin', you're going to take me to my grave</span>
            </p>
         <p>
            <span style="color: orange;">If I could break these chains and let my worried heart go free
               If I could break these chains and let my worried heart go free</span>
            But it's too late now, the blues have made a slave of me
            </p>
         <p>
            <span style="color: orange;">You see me ravin', you hear me cryin'
               Oh Lord, this wounded heart of mine
               Folks, I'm all grievin' from my hat to my shoes</span>
            I'm a good-hearted woman, just been a slave to the blues
            </p>
      </section>
         <section id="Bad-Luck">
         <h2>Bad Luck Blues</h2>
         <h2>Ma Rainey</h2>
         <p>
            Hey people, <span style="color: blue;">listen while I spread my news</span> 
            Hey people, <span style="color: blue;">listen while I spread my news</span> 
            I wanna tell you people all about my bad luck blues</p>
         <p>
            Did you ever wake up just at the break of day? 
            Did you ever break up just at the wake of day?
            
            <span style="color: red;">With your arms around the pillow where your daddy used to lay?</span></p>
         <p>
            Lord, look where the sun done gone
            Lord, Lord, look where the sun done gone
            
            Hey Lord, there's something going all wrong</p>
         <p>
            <span style="color: orange;">What’s the use of livin', you can't get the man you love 
               The use of livin’, you can't get the man you love 
               You might as well just die, give your soul to the Maker above</span></p>
      </section>
   </body>
</html>